Questions for grade 4
To get a grade 4 you need to answer all questions 1-27.
Reads quality control
1. How is the quality of your data?
2. What can generate the “fails” in FastQC that you observe in your data? Can these
cause any problems during subsequent analyses?
Reads preprocessing
3. How many reads have been discarded after trimming?
4. How can this affect your future analyses and results?
5. How is the quality of your data after trimming?
6. What quality threshold did you choose for the leading/trailing/slidingwindow
parameters, and why?
Genome and Metagenome Assembly
7. What information can you get from the plots and reports given by the assembler (if
you get any)?
8. What intermediate steps generate informative output about the assembly?
9. How many contigs do you expect? How many do you obtain?
10. Do you expect the same result between different assemblers, for the same data? If
you tried different assemblers, what differences do you see in the result and why do you
think that is?
11. What are the k-mers? What are the problems and benefits of choosing a small or a
large k-mer?
12. Some assemblers can include a read-correction step before doing the assembly.
What is this step doing?
Assembly evaluation
13. How does your assembly compare with the reference assembly? What could have
caused the differences?
14. Do you think your assembly is better/worse than the public one?
Annotation
15. What types of features are detected by the software? Would you trust the prediction
of some features over others and why?
16. How can you evaluate the quality of the obtained functional annotation?
17. How many features of each kind are detected in your contigs? Do you detect the
same number of features as the authors? How do they differ?
18. How many genes are annotated as ‘hypothetical protein’? Why is that so? How
would you tackle that problem?
Mapping
19. What percentage of your reads map back to your contigs? Why do you think that is?
20. What do you interpret from your read coverage differences across the genome?
21. Do you see big differences between replicates?
Read counting
22. What is the distribution of the counts per gene (plot a histogram of read counts per
gene)? Are most genes expressed? How many counts would indicate that a gene is
expressed?
Expression analyses
23. If your expression results differ from those in the published article, why could it be?
24. How do the different samples and replicates cluster together?
25. How did you sort your differential expression results? Why?
26. Do you need a normalization step? What would you normalize against? Does DESeq
do it?
27. What would you do to increase the statistical power of your expression analysis?




Questions for grade 5
To achieve a grade of 5, you must (in addition to the questions for grade 4) answer the
questions for two of your additional analyses. The specific analyses will depend on your
project and the specific analyses you have done. If you performed an analysis that is not
listed among the suggested extra analyses, please consult the TAs, and they will provide
appropriate questions for your analysis.
--- Paper 1 ---
- 1. Genome assembly with Nanopore and Illumina reads
1. Which assembly is more suitable for downstream analyses? Why?
2. What is the size of the largest contig of each assembly?
3. Which assembly do you think is more accurate?
4. Compare total assembly length to known/expected genome size.
- 2. Assembly evaluation extra methods (BUSCO and Mummerplot/ACT) (note that
for Mummerplot/ACT you need to use the one you didn’t use for the basic analysis)
1. Which BUSCO dataset did you use in your analysis and why?
2. Identify one BUSCO gene marked as “Fragmented”. Why do you think it was
marked as fragmented?
3. Identify one BUSCO gene marked as “Multi-copy.” How many copies are
present, and what is the function of this gene?
4. How did you filter the alignments for your synteny plot?
5. What type of rearrangements can you see in your synteny plot?
- 3. Annotation refinement
1. Pick one protein annotated by EggNOG and further investigate its predicted
function. Use the available information such as the orthologous group (OG)
assignment, associated KEGG pathways and KEGG reactions to better
understand its possible biological role. Pick a few of the IDs, explain what
they represent and if they contribute in some way to the functional
classification of the protein.
2. The strain of E. faecium that is studied in this paper is predicted to be
resistant to vancomycin. How many of the genes that belong to the operon
that confers resistance to vancomycin can be found in the annotation
provided by eggnog? If you could not find all of them, which other resources
could you use to do it?
3. Use KEGG Mapper to evaluate the completeness of relevant metabolic
pathways, focus on one that seems to be partially incomplete (missing one or
a few genes) and see if the gene/genes missing can be found by other
methods (blast…). Do you think the pathway could still be functional? Has this
absence been reported in closely related strains or species?
- 4. Plasmid identification
1. Based on your BLAST results, how many total plasmids did you identify in
your E. faecium (canu) assembly? Assemblers sometimes break a single true
plasmid into multiple smaller contigs. Did you find evidence of a single
plasmid being fragmented across multiple contigs in your assembly? If yes:
Choose one specific case study. State the exact tig numbers involved, and
explain the analyses that you performed to prove these separate contigs
actually belong to the same plasmid. Provide screenshots of your results to
support your explanation.
2. Based on your (canu) assembly output, which specific contigs did you identify
as circular plasmids? Please list their exact tig numbers and provide a
screenshot of your terminal showing the circularity evidence.
3. Select one of the circular contigs that you identified as a plasmid in Q2a. Run
a BLAST search against Enterococcus faecium using the sequence from that
specific contig. In your top 10 hits, is the E745 strain present? Provide a
screenshot of your BLAST results showing the top hits and clearly state which
tig number you chose to search.
4. Looking at the E745 strain hit from the BLAST search you just performed,
what is the exact Accession Number and the Percentage Identity? Provide a
screenshot that displays both of these values for your specific hit.
- 5. SNP calling
1. Explain the structure of a VCF file.
2. How did you filter the VCF table?
3. Which substitution type is the most common in your dataset?
4. What is the transition/transversion ratio of your dataset?
5. What does the SNP distribution look like across the reference genome? Do
some regions have more SNPs than others? Why do you think that is?
- 6. Evaluating antibiotic resistance potential
1. How many antibiotics is the strain predicted to be resistant to? And sensitive?
2. Which mutation in the gene gyrA confers resistance to nalidixic acid and
ciprofloxacin? And in the gene parC?
3. Which mapping method uses ResFinder?
4. Why is it important to evaluate the antibiotic resistance potential of a bacterial
strain?
- 7. Identify essential genes for growth in human serum based on the Tn-Seq data
analysis.
1. How did the authors get the data from the Tn-Seq analysis? What type of
data is it?
2. What is the goal of the Tn-Seq analysis?
3. Which genes seem to be important for E. faecium to grow in human serum?
Attach a plot that supports your conclusion, analyze it and explain briefly your
workflow.
- 8. Polishing the assembly with Illumina reads.
1. What types of corrections were made?
2. How many corrections of each type were made?
3. How did the quality of your genome change after polishing? (run QUAST to
find out)
4. Why do we typically use Illumina reads for polishing?
5. What does the polishing result tell you about the quality of your original
assembly?